---
type: NetWork
title: 网络基础
date: 2019-11-11
category: NetWork
description: 网络基础
---



# NewWork

- [NewWork](#newwork)
  - [TCP/IP(ARPA)4-layer model](#tcpiparpa4-layer-model)
  - [IP Addressing](#ip-addressing)
    - [IPv4](#ipv4)
    - [IPv6](#ipv6)
  - [TCP VS UDP](#tcp-vs-udp)
  - [Subnetting, netmasks and CIDR](#subnetting-netmasks-and-cidr)
  - [Classful Addressing](#classful-addressing)
  - [Private address space](#private-address-space)
  - [NAT](#nat)

## TCP/IP(ARPA)4-layer model

- Link Layer

    a combination of the ISO layer1(physical) and layer2(data link) layers. As an example, both Ethernet and MAC are coverd in this layer.

- Network layer

    This layer maps to the ISO's layer 3,and covers the movement of packets between networks. For this reason, it is also called the "internet layer",and the main protocal used in this layer is named the "Internet Protocal", or "IP" as it is commonly refered to.AS discussed above, the ICMP and IGMP protocols are also included is this layer.

- Transport layer

    This layer maps to the ISO's Layer 4, and covers the creation, management and teardown of "virtual circuits" or "flows" between end hosts. There are two different protocols in use at this layer as discussed above in the ISO Layer 4 section, namely TCP and UDP.

- Application Layer

    This layer maps to the ISO's Layer 6 through Layer 7, and covers the application processes that use the network to communicate.



## IP Addressing

### IPv4

Internet Protocol Version 4 is the fourth version of the internet protocol. the first version to be widely deployed. This is the version of the protocol you're most likely the encounter, and the default version of the IP protocol in Linux.

IPv4 users a 32-bit address space most typeically represented in 4 dotted decimal notation, each octet containers a value between 0-255, and is separated by a dot,An example address is below:
    `10.199.0.5`

### IPv6

Internet Procotol version 6 is the latest version for the future, because the IPv4 address is not enough to use, the most different of the ipv4 and ipv6 is the representation. unlike ipv4, ipv6 use a hexadecimal digits separated by a colon. For example:
    `2001:0DB8:0000:CBAD:4321:0000:0000:1234`

Leadding zero may dbe left off of a group in the address . Whole groups of zeros may be left out entirely, but only once.Generally, the longest run of zeros is dropped, but any run may be. Using these rules ,the above address can also be represented in either of these ways:
    `2001:DB8::CBAD:4321:0000:0000:1234`, `2001:DB8:0000:CBAD:4321::1234`


## TCP VS UDP

Both TCP and UDP provide data transfer between processes through prots. Thess processes ports can be on the same computer or separate computers connected by a network. TCP provides the following: reliability, flow control, and connections. UDP is less feature-rich, it does its work with a header the only containers a source port,destation port, a lengeh, and a checksum. TCP provides its capabilites by sending more header data, more packets between ports and performing more processling. UDP requires less header data in the individual packets
and requires fewer packet on the network to do its work.


The choice of protocols to use is often based on whether the disk of losing packets in real-time with immediate alerting is acceptable, In some case UDP may be acceptable, such as video or audio streaming where program can interpolate over missing packets, However,TCP will be required due to tis reliable delivery guarrntee in systems the support banking or health care.

    - Example 1 
    
        The TCP protocol requires upfront communication and the UDP protocol does not. TCP requires an inital connection, known as the "three way handshake", in order to begin sending data, That amounts to noe inital packet sent between prots from initator of the communication to the receiver, then another packet sent bak, and the a final packet sent from the initator to the receiver again. ALL the happens before sending the first byte of data. In UDP the first packet sent contains the first byte of data.
    
    - Example 2 
    
        TCP and UDP differ in the size of their packet headers. The TCP header is 20 bytes and the UDP header is 8 Bytes. For programs that send a lot of packets with very little data, the header length can be large percentage of overhead data. 


## Subnetting, netmasks and CIDR

A subnet is a logical divsion of an IP Network, and allows the host system to identify which other hosts can be reached on the local network. The host system determines this by the application of a routing profix. There are two typical representations of this prefix: a netmask and Classless inter-Domain Routing(CIDR)


Netmasks typically appear in the dotted decimal notation, with values between 0-255 in each octet. These are applied as bitmasks, and numbers at 255 mean that this host is not reachable. Netmask can alse be referred to as a Subnet Mask and these terms are often used interchangeably. An example IPv4 address with a typical netmask is below:

|IP Address  |Netmask|
| :----------| -----------:|
|192.168.1.1 |255.255.255.0|

CIDR notaion is a two-digit representation of this routing prefix. Its value can range between 0 and 32. while having long between a staple in network equipment and used mainly by network engineers, CIDR notaion can now be found in Linux(iproute's ip command uses CIDR notation). In addition, CIDR nonation is often encountered in discuiiions, as it's quicker and simpler to reference than a netmask An example with CIDR nonation is below:


|IP Address  |CIDR|
| :----------| -----------:|
|192.168.1.1 |/24|



## Classful Addressing

Such As "Class A", "Class B", "Class C". One can see how using an entire /16(65534 hosts) when only five hosts are needed would be wasteful. As Such, CIDR was created, allowing people to create subnets only as large as required.For these reasons, one should not refer to any particular network block as a "Class X".

## Private address space

Certain ranges of address were reserved for private networks, Using this address space you cannot communicate with public machines without a NAT gateway or proxy, There are three reserved blocks:


|First Address|Last Address|Netmask|CIDR|
| :-------------:| :---------------: | :----------: |:-----:|
| 10.0.0.0      | 10.255.255.255  | 255.0.0.0| /8   |
| 172.16.0.0    | 172.31.255.255  | 255.240.0.0 | /12 |
| 192.168.0.0   | 192.168.255.255 | 255.255.0.0  | /16 |


## NAT

Network Address Translation,or NAT, is a technology that allows multiple internet-connected devices to share one common public IP address,while stilling retaining unique,individual private IP address. The destinction between public and private is integral to the understanding of the service that NAT provides and how it works.

When a device behind a NAT-enabled router sends a packet,the source IP address on the packet is the device's local,private IP address, If the packet is going outside the local network,it will pass through a router,whick will modify the source IP address to its own public IP address. When a response for the packet is received by the router,it needs to ensure that the response can be forwarded to the host that sent the packet in the first place. To do this ,the router maintains a `Translation Table`. This table maps a device's IP address and port to a port on the router itself. The router's publick IP address and the correct port number from the table are used as the source IP and port on the packet and then sent to the destination.


These maps are temporary and exists on a per-connection basis. This means that each connection opened by a device will have a unique port number on the device and a unique prot number on the router as well. This port on the router is used as the public port for that connection. Once the connection terminates,the router is free to used as the public port for that connection. Once the connection terminates,the router is free to assign that port to another conneciton. However, the total number of avaiable ports is limited to 65,536,so it is entirely possible that a router has no more free ports and cannot assign a New NAT address. This is commonly referred to as port exhaustion.


Similar to port exhaustion, timeout can alse affect the router's abilily to assign new NAT address. Each entry in the translation table has a timeout value which refers to the amount of time for which thet entry can remain inactive and still keep its place in the table.